---
tags:
  - mathematics/linear_algebra
---
# 1.2 Row Reduction and Echelon Forms

## Echelon Forms

> [!definition] **Definition** (Nonzero Row)
> A nonzero row or column is a row or a column that contains at least one nonzero entry.

> [!definition] **Definition** (Leading Entry)
> A leading entry of a row is the leftmost nonzero entry.

> [!definition] **Definition** (Echelon Forms)
> A rectangular matrix is in **Echelon Form** (or Row Echelon Form) if it satisfies the following properties
> 1. All nonzero rows are above any rows of all zeros
> 2. Each leading entry of a row is in a column to the right of the leading entry of the row above it
> 3. All entries in a column below a leading entry are zeros
>
> If a matrix satisfies the following additional properties, then it is in **Reduced Echelon Form** (Or Row Reduced Echelon Form)
> 1. The leading entry in each nonzero row is 1
> 2. Each leading 1 is the only nonzero 1 in its column

> [!example] **Example** (Identify the Matrix)
> Determine if the matrix is in RREF, Echelon form, or neither
>
> $$
> 1. \quad \quad
> \begin{pmatrix}
> 1 & 0 & 0 & 0 \\
> 0 & 1 & 0 & 0 \\
> 0 & 0 & 1 & 1
> \end{pmatrix}
> $$
>
> $$
> 2. \quad \quad
> \begin{pmatrix}
> 1 & 0 & 0 & 0 \\
> 0 & 1 & 1 & 0 \\
> 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 \\
> 0 & 0 & 0 & 1
> \end{pmatrix}
> $$
>
> $$
> 3. \quad \quad
> \begin{pmatrix}
> 1 & 0 & 1 & 0 \\
> 0 & 1 & 1 & 0 \\
> 0 & 0 & 0 & 1
> \end{pmatrix}
> $$
>
> $$
> 4. \quad \quad
> \begin{pmatrix}
> 1 & 1 & 0 & 1 & 1 \\
> 0 & 2 & 0 & 2 & 2 \\
> 0 & 0 & 0 & 3 & 3 \\
> 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 4
> \end{pmatrix}
> $$

A nonzero matrix can be row reduced (transformed by elementary row operations) into a matrix in echelon form or in RREF.

> [!definition] **Definition** (Pivot Position and Column)
> A *pivot position* in a matrix is a location that corresponds to a leading 1 in the RREF of the matrix. A *pivot column* is a column that contain a pivot position.

## Row Reduction Algorithm

1. Locate the pivot position at the top of the leftmost nonzero column (pivot column)
2. Select a nonzero entry in the pivot column as a pivot. If necessary, interchange rows to move this entry into the pivot position
3. Use row operations to create zeros in all positions below the pivot
4. Ignore the row containing the pivot position and any row above it and apply steps 1-3 to the submatrix that remains. Repeat the process until there are no more nonzero rows to modify
5. If we want the RREF, begin with the rightmost pivot and work upward and to the left to create zeros above each pivot. If a pivot isn't 1, make it 1 by scaling

Row reduction leads directly to an explicit description of the solution set. The variables corresponding to the pivot columns are called *basic variables*, the other variables are called *free variables*. When a system is consistent, we solve for the basic variables in terms of the free variables.

> [!theorem] **Theorem** (Existence and Uniqueness Theorem)
> A linear system is consistent if and only if its augmented matrix has no rows of the form $(0, \dots, \dots, 0, h)$ where $b \neq 0$. If a linear system is consistent, then either it has a unique solution (when there are no free variables) or it has infinitely many solutions (when there are at least one free variable).