---
tags:
  - mathematics/ordinary_differential_equations
---
# Modeling with First order Differential Equations

The initial-value problem $\frac{dx}{dt} = kx, \ x(0) = x_{0}$ where $k$ is a constant of proportionality, serves as a model for diverse phenomena involving either growth or decay.

The particular solution to the above equation is $x = x_{0}e^{kt}$

**Problem 1**

A culture initially has $N$ number of bacteria. At $t = 1$ hour the number of bacteria is measured to be $1.5$$N$. If the rate of growth is proportional to the number of bacteria $P(t)$ present at time $t$, determine the time necessary for the number of bacteria to triple.

$$
\begin{align}
\frac{dP}{dt} = KP, & \ P(0) = N \\
P = Ne^{kt}, \ P(1) &= 1.5N \\
1.5N &= Ne^{k} \\
1.5 &= e^{k} \\
\ln \lvert 1.5 \rvert &= k \\
P &= Ne^{\ln \lvert 1.5 \rvert t } \\
P &= 1.5Nt \\
P &= 1.5Nt \\
t &= 2
\end{align}
$$

Another model for population growth is the logistic differential equation:

$$
\frac{dP}{dt} = kP\left( 1- \frac{P}{M} \right), \ P(0) = P_{0}
$$

where $M$ is known as the carrying capacity.

The solution to the logistic equation is $P = \frac{M}{1+Ae^{-kt}}$ where $A = \frac{M-P_{0}}{P_{0}}$

**Problem 2**
Suppose a student carrying a flu virus returns to an isolated college campus of 1000 students. If it is assumed that the rate at which the virus spreads follows the logistical growth model and $k = 0.9906$ determine the number of infected students $x$ after 6 days if it is further observed that after 4 days $x(4) = 50$.

$$
\begin{align}
x &= \frac{M}{1+Ae^{-0.9906t}}, \ x(0) = 1 \\
x &= \frac{1000}{1 + Ae^{-0.9906t}} \\
x &= \frac{1000}{1+999e^{-0.9906t}} \\
x(6) &= \frac{1000}{1+999e^{-0.9906t}} \\
 &\approx 276 \text{ students}
\end{align}
$$

When mixing two brine solutions, we assume that the rate $A'(t)$ at which the amount of salt in the mixing tank changes is a net rate:

$$
\frac{dA}{dt} = r_{\text{in}} - r_{\text{out}}
$$

**Problem 3**

Suppose that a large mixing tank initially holds 300 gallons of brine. Another brine solution is pumped into the large tank at a rate of 3 gal/min. The concentration of salt in this inflow is 2 lbs/gal. When the solution is well stirred, it is pumped out at the same rate as the entering solution. If $A(t)$ denotes the amount of salt in the tank at time $t$, and if 50 pounds of salt were dissolved initially in the 300 gallons, how much salt is in the tank after a long time?

$$
\frac{dA}{dt} + \frac{1}{100}A = 6
$$

Newton's law of cooling of an object is given by the linear first order ordinary differential equation,

$$
\frac{dT}{dt} = k(T - T_{m})
$$

where $k$ is the constant of proportionality, $T(t)$ is the temperature of the object for $t > 0$ and $T_{m}$ is the temperature of the medium surrounding the object.

**Problem 4**

When a cake is removed from an oven, its temperature is measured at 300 degrees $F$. Three minutes later its temperature is 200 degrees $F$. How long will it take to cool to a room temperature of 75 degrees $F$?

$$
\begin{align}
\frac{dT}{dt} &= k[T-75], \ T(0) = 300 \\
\frac{dT}{T-75} &= k \ dt \\
\int \frac{dT}{T - 75} &= \int k \ dt \\
\ln \lvert T - 75 \rvert &= kt + C \ \text{ at } T(0) = 300  \\
C  &= \ln \lvert 225 \rvert \\
k &= \frac{\ln 125 - \ln 225 }{3} \\
t &= 40
\end{align}
$$
